
* [Docker](#Docker)
  * [Commands](#essential-docker-commands)
  * [Dockerfile](#dockerfile)
  * [Example](#end-to-end-example)

# Docker
### What is Docker?
Docker is a containerization platform that allows to put applications and their dependencies into isolated, lightweight containers.
<br>
These containers can run consistently across different environments, such as development, testing, and production, ensuring that an application behaves the same way regardless of the underlying infrastructure.

Docker containers work by running on top of the Docker Engine, which uses the host operating system's kernel but allows each container to be isolated, manage its own dependencies, and execute independently.

### Key Docker Concepts:
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**Images**:</kbd> Docker images are the building blocks of containers. They contain everything needed to run an application, including the code, runtime, system tools, and libraries.
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**Containers**:</kbd> Containers are instances of Docker images. They run in isolated environments and provide a consistent runtime environment for applications.
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**Docker Hub**:</kbd> Docker Hub is a repository for finding and sharing Docker images.

## Essential Docker Commands

- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker build**</kbd> - Build an image from a Dockerfile
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker run**</kbd> - Create and run a new container from an image
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker ps**</kbd> - List containers
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker start**</kbd> - Start one or more stopped containers
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker stop**</kbd> - Stop one or more running containers
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker rm**</kbd> - Remove one or more containers
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker rmi**</kbd> - Remove one or more images
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker image**</kbd> - Manage images
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker images**</kbd> - Lists all images stored locally
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker pull**</kbd> - Downloads an image or a repository from a registry
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker push**</kbd> - Uploads an image or a repository to a registry
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker login**</kbd> - Authenticates to a Docker registry
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker logout**</kbd> - Logs out from a Docker registry
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker exec**</kbd> - Runs a command in a running container
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker logs**</kbd> - Fetches the logs of a container
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker network**</kbd> - Manages networks
- <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker volume**</kbd> - Manages volumes. Volumes are used to persist data generated by and used by Docker containers

---

 ### `docker build`
 Builds a Docker image from a Dockerfile. A Dockerfile contains a set of instructions for creating an image that includes the application, its dependencies, and runtime environments.

 <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker build [OPTIONS] PATH | URL**</kbd>
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>PATH</kbd> specifies the location of the Dockerfile and related context (e.g., files used in the build).
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>URL</kbd> can be used to specify a Git repository as the source of the Dockerfile and context.
 - **Optional parameters**
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>-t, --tag</kbd>: Name and optionally a tag in the 'name:tag' format.
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>--build-arg</kbd> Set build-time variables.
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>--no-cache</kbd> Do not use cache when building the image.
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>-f, --file</kbd> Name of the Dockerfile (Default is PATH/Dockerfile).

**Examples:**
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>docker build -t {image name} -f Dockerfile .</kbd> - build image with name.
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>docker build -t {image name}:{tag} --no-cache --build-arg {arguments like - ENVIRONMENT=production} -f Dockerfile .</kbd> - build image with name, arguments and no cache during building.

---

### `docker run`
 Creates a new container from a specified image and starts it. If the image is not available locally, Docker will attempt to pull it from the configured registry.

<kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker run [OPTIONS] IMAGE [COMMAND] [ARG...]**</kbd>
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>IMAGE</kbd> is the name of the image to start the container from.
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>COMMAND</kbd> and ARG specify the command to run inside the container.
 - **Optional parameters**
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>-d, --detach</kbd> Run container in background and print container ID.
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>--name</kbd> Assign a custom name to the container. If not specified, Docker generates a random name.
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>-p, --publish</kbd> Publish a container's port(s) to the host. Format: hostPort:containerPort.
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>-e, --env</kbd> Set environment variables. Format: VARIABLE=value.
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>--rm</kbd> Automatically remove the container when it exits. This is useful for not leaving behind any stopped containers.
   - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>-v, --volume</kbd> Mount a volume. Format: hostSrc:containerDest or just the volume name if using Docker volumes.

**Examples:**
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>docker run --name {container name} {image name}</kbd> - start a container from an image.
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>docker run -d --name {container name} {image name}</kbd> - start a container in the background.
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>docker run -e ENVIRONMENT=production --name {container name} {image name}</kbd> - start a container with an environment variable.

---

 ### `docker ps`
 Lists containers. By default, it shows only running containers.

<kbd style='color:#cbb786'>**docker ps [OPTIONS]**</kbd>

**Optional parameters**
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>-a, --all</kbd>: Show all containers (default shows just running).
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>-q, --quiet</kbd>: Only display container IDs.
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>-f, --filter</kbd>: Filter the output based on conditions like status, id, name, etc.

**Examples:**
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>docker ps</kbd> - List running containers
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>docker ps -a</kbd> - List all containers, including those that are stopped
 - <kbd style='color:#cbb786'>docker ps -q</kbd> - List the IDs of all running containers

---

### `docker start`
Starts one or more containers.

`docker start [OPTIONS] CONTAINER [CONTAINER...]`

- **CONTAINER**: The container ID or name. You can specify multiple containers to start.

**Optional parameters**
 - `-a, --attach`: Attach STDOUT/STDERR and forward signals.
 - `-i, --interactive`: Attach container's STDIN.

**Examples:**
 - `docker start {container name or ID}` - Start a stopped container.
 - `docker start -a {container name or ID}` - Start a stopped container and attach to it.

---

### `docker stop`
Stops one or more running containers.

`docker stop [OPTIONS] CONTAINER [CONTAINER...]`

- **CONTAINER**: The container ID or name. You can specify multiple containers to stop.

**Examples:**
- `docker stop {container name or ID}` - Stop a running container.
- `docker stop $(docker ps -q)` - Stop all running containers by passing the IDs of all running containers.

---

### `docker rm`
Removes one or more containers.

`docker rm [OPTIONS] CONTAINER [CONTAINER...]`

- **Optional parameters**
 - `-f, --force`: Force the removal of a running container (uses SIGKILL).
 - `-v, --volumes`: Remove the associated volumes with the container.

**Examples:**
 - `docker rm {container name or ID}` - Remove a stopped container.
 - `docker rm -f $(docker ps -a -q)` - Forcefully remove all containers, including running ones.

---

### `docker rmi`
Removes one or more images from the local storage. This command is used to manage the disk space by cleaning up unused images.

`docker rmi [OPTIONS] IMAGE [IMAGE...]`

- **IMAGE**: The image ID, repository, or tag. You can specify multiple images to remove.

**Optional parameters**
- `-f, --force`: Force removal of the image, even if it's being used by stopped containers or has dependent child images.
- `--no-prune`: Do not remove untagged parents.

**Examples:**
- `docker rmi {image ID or repository:tag}` - Remove a specific image by its ID or name and tag.
- `docker rmi -f {image ID}` - Forcefully remove an image, even if it is being used.
- `docker rmi $(docker images -q)` - Remove all images by passing the IDs of all images.

---

### `docker image`
Manages images. This is a parent command for several subcommands used to manage images in Docker.

`docker image [COMMAND]`

Some common subcommands include:
- `ls`: List images.
- `rm`: Remove one or more images.
- `pull`: Pull an image or a repository from a registry.
- `push`: Push an image or a repository to a registry.
- `build`: Build an image from a Dockerfile.

Each subcommand has its own set of options and usage.

**Examples:**
- `docker image ls` - List all images.
- `docker image rm {image ID or name:tag}` - Remove a specific image.
- `docker image pull {repository:tag}` - Pull an image from a registry.
- `docker image push {repository:tag}` - Push an image to a registry.

---

### `docker images`
Lists all locally stored Docker images. This command provides a quick way to see what images are available on your system.

`docker images [OPTIONS] [REPOSITORY[:TAG]]`

- **Optional parameters**
  - `-a, --all`: Show all images (default hides intermediate images).
  - `-q, --quiet`: Only show image IDs.
  - `--format`: Pretty-print images using a Go template.
  - `-f, --filter`: Filter output based on conditions provided.

**Examples:**
- `docker images` - List all top-level images, their repository, tag, ID, creation time, and size.
- `docker images -a` - List all images, including intermediate images.
- `docker images -q` - List the IDs of all images.
- `docker images --format "{{.Repository}}:{{.Tag}} {{.Size}}"` - List images with a custom format showing repository, tag, and size.
- `docker images -f "dangling=true"` - List all dangling images (images without tags).

---


## Dockerfile
In summary, this Dockerfile defines a multi-stage build process where the first stage builds the .NET application, and the second stage prepares a lighter runtime environment to run the application.

```dockerfile
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/sdk:8.0 AS build-env
WORKDIR /App

COPY . ./

RUN dotnet restore

RUN dotnet publish -c Release -o out

FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:8.0
WORKDIR /App
COPY --from=build-env /App/out .
ENTRYPOINT ["dotnet", "{service name}.dll"]
```

`FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/sdk:8.0 AS build-env` - This line is telling Docker to use the .NET SDK version 8.0 image from Microsoft's Container Registry as the base image for the build process.
  - `Container Registry` - Storage for container images. In the context of this file: It is Microsoft's own container registry designed to provide a globally available service for pulling Microsoft's container images.
  - `AS build-env` - Set a name to this stage to use it later like a variable.

`WORKDIR /App` - Sets the working directory inside the container to /App. This is the directory where your application's code will reside within the container during the build process.

`COPY . ./` - Copies everything from your project's folder (where the Dockerfile is located) into the current working directory inside the container (*/App*).

`RUN dotnet restore` - Executes the dotnet restore command. This command looks at the .NET project files in the container and downloads any dependencies (*libraries and packages*) that are needed to build the project.

`RUN dotnet publish -c Release -o out` - This command builds your .NET application in release mode (*optimized for production*) and outputs the compiled files to the *out* directory within the */App* directory in the container.
 - `-c Release` - The -c Release option specifies that the build should be done in Release configuration, which is optimized for performance.

`FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:8.0` - After building the application, this line starts a new stage in the Dockerfile. It uses the .NET runtime image (*not the SDK*) version 8.0 as the base image. This image is lighter than the SDK image and is suitable for running the application but not for building it.

`WORKDIR /App` - Sets the working directory in this new stage (runtime stage) to */App*, similar to what was done in the build stage.

`COPY --from=build-env /App/out .` - Copies the compiled application from the out directory of the build-env (*the first stage*) to the current working directory (*/App*) of the current stage. This means we are transferring only the necessary files needed to run the application, leaving behind the source code, SDK, and any other unnecessary files.

`ENTRYPOINT ["dotnet", "{service name}.dll"]` - Specifies the command to run when the container starts. This is the main assembly that was compiled and published in the previous steps.


# End-to-end example

**Create a Dockerfile**
```dockerfile
# Use the .NET 8 SDK image to build the application
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/sdk:8.0 AS build-env
WORKDIR /App

# Copy csproj and restore any dependencies (via NuGet)
COPY *.csproj ./
RUN dotnet restore

# Copy the project files and build the application
COPY . ./
RUN dotnet publish -c Release -o out

# Use the .NET 8 runtime image to run the application
FROM mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:8.0
WORKDIR /App
COPY --from=build-env /App/out .
ENTRYPOINT ["dotnet", "MyApp.dll"]
```

This Dockerfile does the following:
 - Starts with the .NET 8 SDK image to build your application.
 - Sets the working directory to /App.
 - Copies the .csproj file and restores dependencies.
 - Copies the application's source code and publishes the application to the out directory.
 - For the final image, it switches to the .NET 8 runtime image.
 - Copies the published application from the build environment to the runtime environment.
 - Specifies the command to run the application.

**Build the Docker Image** - `docker build -t my-dotnet-image .`

**Run the Container** - `docker run -d -p 8080:80 --name my-dotnet-container my-dotnet-image`

**View the Container's Logs** - `docker logs my-dotnet-container`